The Merit of my Sin


“Pencils down!” The proctor announced. He stood at the front of the room, peering at everyone sitting before him. He had to ensure no one would cheat or break the rules during this exam since it was vital for the agency to receive only the best.
        Paul finished scribbling in the last bubble on his scantron and placed his pencil down. Leaning back in his chair, he heaved out a sigh of relief. It was finally over. The grueling test took up the past three hours of his day, and it would be only a matter of hours before he got his results. And he was certain he was passing and being accepted for the position at the agency. He deserved it after all: Paul had been studying for the months leading up to the exam, so it only made sense for him to be the best out of the bunch.
        One by one, people started lifting themselves out of their chairs and piling out the door. Paul followed and left for the waiting room. There, he looked around at the people around him—his fellow test-takers. One was banging on the vending machine after his chip bag got stuck. Another, by the corner, was balancing a pencil on her nose while her friends watched in amusement. To his left, a tall and confident-looking man stood conversing with a group of emersed bystanders. He eyed the man up and down. The way he kindly discussed with the group of sheep surrounding him, the way he got them all to laugh, the way he gently eased their anxieties through meaningless words; it was all showing of his hubris. That man was clearly too arrogant for his own good. And these cattle bought into it
        The hours ticked by. People shuffled throughout the room, changing from standing to sitting, sitting to lying down, lying down to sleeping. Eventually, a man walked through the door. His rimmed spectacles glinted in the fluorescent lighting of the waiting room. He cleared his throat and announced that the winner had been chosen. Paul sat up, ready to walk over and accept the position. However, the man announced a name Paul was not familiar with. Did they write the wrong name down?
        The tall man to his left, who had been conversing with the group earlier, got up and walked over to the spectacled man. Paul watched bitterly as he accepted the job and was welcomed in. This job was his! How could someone like that possibly get in? Paul just had to know.
        He got up and walked over to the man, congratulating him on his success.
        “Congratulations!” Paul asked. “How did you do it?”
        The man smiled gently down at the paper in his hands, “To be honest, I don’t know.”
        His eyes gently wrinkled at the corner, but a solemn look shrouded his face as if he were hiding something.
        “My name is James, by the way,” He stuck out his hand. “Sorry, I didn’t mention it earlier.”
        Paul gingerly clasped his hand around James’s, repressing a grimace, “No. No. The mistake was mine: I forgot to ask. My name is Paul.”
        They discussed for the better part of an hour. He was a truly fascinating man in the deplorable sense. Paul chatted fervently with James, but he never wanted to go in-depth into the discussion. The topics were seemingly boring and, to Paul, would not help him or improve him in any way. Therefore, he concluded, they must be meaningless.
        Later, as the last of the participants began emptying out the room, James extended an invitation to Paul for dinner. Paul waved his hands in front of him, refusing to place the burden on James. James lightly insisted once more, and Paul gave in. They traveled together to James’s home. It was not far from the Agency itself, so they reached their destination quickly. Once settled, James began to wine and dine Paul, to which he weakly refused. Eventually, they began their dinner and resumed their previous chit-chat about superficial topics on finance and the latest stock investment. It seemed to Paul that James was well-versed in all matters of finance. However, he could not shake off that eerie feeling of disingenuousness coming from James. He, in all matters, spoke as if reading from a textbook rather than anecdotally. Eventually, the subject matter shifted back to the exam.
        Paul inquired of James once more, who was now tipsy from all the wine, “James, I must ask once more- And I truly hope you’ll be fully transparent with me here- but how did you do it?”
        "Funny thing is, Paul. I didn't even study for this test." He laughed, pouring himself another glass and taking a swig at it. "I just got my dad to ask the agency head to let me in... -hik. I guess it worked."
He put his glass down and traced the rim with his finger, his eyes foggy. Maybe he was waiting for Paul to look away so he could just pour himself another glass.
"I- I don't really think it's fair." James looked off to the side. "That I got this job because of my dad. Maybe there is someone else out there who is better, but I'm the one who got it."
James looked back at Paul and chuckled as if this were all a joke to him. "But I'm just rambling, aren't I? There's no need to get so melechonic with my guest."
Yet he is here rambling to his guest. Does he expect praise for his oh-so-great level of personal enlightenment? Paul looked at the drunk man and smiled. He truly believes he is better than everyone. 
“Please go on,” Paul insisted, grinning hideously.
“Ah, well… In my opinion, and from what I’ve seen, this system- it… it isn’t very fair. Well, not in the sen-”
Look at him: pretending to be some saint. He has no care for right or wrong? Can he judge? Can he discern justice? Well, he is trying, isn’t he? At the very least, he isn’t ignorant. And is apathy any better? Here he is preaching unfairness when he is secretly rejoicing at his achievement. That isn’t fair; he could have earned it. But how? How can he be better? He said it himself: it was his father’s doing. True, but not his. No. He is a part of this. He accepted. Who wouldn’t? I wouldn’t. This is all a great mistake. There will be other opportunities. This is a mistake: Letting this one slip by.
“...I remember my father telling me, ‘Sonny, reasonable poverty is more dangerous than misery.’ What does that even mean?” James laughed to himself, clearly amused with it all.
He is enjoying this. He is making a mockery of me. Should I just stay here and take it? My pride won’t remain scarred, however, if I don’t do anything. It’d be better to go- It’d be better to protect my pride, my esteem, and my rights. He took my right. My deserved position. And now he makes a mockery of me! In whose hands but mine can this be fixed?
Paul got out of his chair and gently pushed it back in, beginning to walk towards James.
“Why’d you get up?” James wondered.
Paul wondered if he was wrong. Could he be wrong? He approached James.
“Hope it’s not too la- ghk!” Paul impaled a steak knife into James’s throat, carving out his trachea and allowing his viscera to spill over his table. A high whining sound escaped his throat. His eyes were wide, eyebrows drawn in and angled toward his nose. His mouth stayed lightly agape.
Paul pulled out the knife and drove it into his chest, backing away slowly. He looked down at his hands, which were smeared in blood and gore, and back at James. His heart raced, and his vision grew blurry. Could he be wrong? Paul raced out of the house and back home. He ran through the night without looking back. Once home, Paul quickly stripped out of his clothes and jumped into the shower. He scrubbed and scrubbed his skin raw. Quickly and urgently, he washed. Once satisfied with his result, Paul left the shower and acclimated himself to his bed, where he rested his head with a deep sigh. Slowly, he began to lull to sleep as he consolidated his day.
The next morning, he was suddenly awoken to the incessant ringing of his telephone. He reached over to pick up the phone with great ache in his shoulder.
Placing the phone to his ear, he answered, “Hello. Who is this?”
“Hello. Is this Paul Vaskive?” The phone spoke.
“Y-yes- yes, it is…” Paul’s heart was thumping. His palms began to perspire. “W-what is it?”
“Yes, Paul. We are glad to inform you that the position at the agency has been vacated, and you are the runner-up for it. Congratulations.” The person on the other side spoke monotonously. “Please report to the agency facility within the hour.”
His mouth was agape, and his eyes were wide. “Thank you! I’ll be there in an hour.”
Paul hung up the phone and rested his head on his pillow, staring vacantly into the ceiling. He, then, pulled his arm over his face and quietly wept.
April 28, 2026